Classes-
Classes are the building blocks of programs built using the object-oriented methodology. 
Such programs consist of independent self-managing modules and their interactions.

An object is an instance of a module, and a class is its definition.

We can use any of the above-mentioned types in the program, but they provide very limited features to the developers. Well, object-oriented programming wouldn’t make sense if we couldn’t make our own objects. This is where classes come into play.

Classes are used to create user-defined data types. The predefined data types in Java are classes themselves. We can use these basic data types to create our own class. The cool part is that our class can contain multiple variables, pointers, and functions which would be available to us whenever a class object is created.

Fields
These are also known as the member variables of a class. This is because they contain the information relevant to the object of the class. A car object would have a top speed, a certain number of seats, and so many other pieces of data that we could store in variables.

Benefits of using classes
The concept of classes allows us to create complex objects and applications in Java. This is why classes are the basic building blocks behind all of the OOP’s principles.

Classes are also very useful in compartmentalizing the code of an application. Different components could become separate classes which would interact through interfaces. These ready-made components will also be available for use in future applications.

The use of classes makes it easier to maintain the different parts of an application since it is easier to make changes in classes.

Declaration-

The class keyword tells the compiler that we are creating our custom class. All the members of the class will be defined within the class scope.

Creating a class object
The name of the class, ClassName, will be used to create an instance of the class in our main program. We can create an object of a class by using the keyword new:









